---
title: "Phenotype Switching during TNFa - TNRF1 Signaling"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/tnf2
date: 2019-10-15
excerpt: Using graph theory based dimnesion reduction and boolean networks we identify key targets for phenotype switch in TNFa-TNRF Signaling Pathway
venue: 'Nextgen Genomics, Biology, Bioinformatics and Technologies Conference'
image: 'tnf-2.png'
width: '800'
---
Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNFα) is a pleiotropic cytokine
involved in phenotypic decisions such as apoptotic/necrotic death,
proliferation. Aberrant TNFα signaling is implicated in numerous
pathological conditions. Designing therapeutic strategies to
modulate these conditions require insights into the mechanisms
governing context-specific phenotypic response to TNFα. Signal
transduction culminating in such responses is orchestrated by
underlying molecular network of nodes interconnected by edges.
Using a comprehensive, well-annotated, manually curated TNFαTNFR1
signaling network, we show that a graph-theory based
dimensionality reduction via modularization can lead to functionally
consistent, conserved modules in the network. We identify 20
candidates which when knocked down one-at-a-time preserves the
network’s modularity as well as robustness. Moreover, using
information from databases, we further identify cell-type specific
interactions in the network. Boolean dynamic simulations of this
complex system and attractor analysis of the underlying state
transition graph show that targeting BCL-2 and ERK-1/2 can lead to
reliable phenotype switching from proliferation to apoptosis. While,
knocking-off JNK-1 with LUBAC can result in switching from
apoptosis to proliferation. Analysis of tissue-specific network,
generated by incorporating the relevant constituent state
information, led to prediction of the fraction of an ensemble of cells
of MCF7 (breast cancer) and U937 (lymphoma) exhibiting the three
distinct phenotypes. These combinations causing phenotype
switching maybe considered potential targets for TNFα based
therapeutic strategies. 

### Citation
'<b>Hrushikesh Loya</b>, Shubhank Sherekar, Sonal Manohar, Sharmila Biswas, Reshma Patil, Ganesh Viswanathan (2019). &quot;Phenotype Switching during TNFa - TNRF1 Signaling; 2019 Sep 30- Oct 2; Mumbai, India</i>.'

[Paper Link](https://hrushikeshloya.github.io/images/tnf-2-poster.pdf)
